---
coverImg: 33.3-cover.jpg
dateCreated: "2014-07-01T11:32:52"
itemId: bcphb2huxmr
layout: page
name: "Volume 33, issue 3: Dreams are Agents for Change"
profileImg: 33.3-rect.jpg
tags:
    - hasAuthor: dreamnetwork
    - hasTag: dream-network-volume-33
    - hasTag: dreamnetwork
type: post
subType: PublicationIssue
urlSlug: "33.3"
---

<p style="margin-block-end: 5px; margin-block-start: 5px;"><a href="../files/pdfs/Volume_33/33.3_change.pdf" download="">Download issue 33.3</a></p><p style="margin-block-end: 5px; margin-block-start: 5px;"><a href="../files/pdfs/Volume_33/33.3_change.pdf">View online</a></p>

As I begin writing this next-to-last editorial, I am keenly aware that to do justice to what I feel and want to say would require a book.

Mainly, I recall the many magnificent individuals I’ve had the privilege of communicating and working with over the past 25 years, and I wonder how my ‘stepping back’ will effect future communications among us. Certainly, the context will change: I will be no longer ‘publisher/ editor’, although I must say that the most meaningful connections I’ve experienced have fallen outside that role.

My hope is that we will continue to communicate, with more focus on dreamsharing, doing dreamwork with one another, and simply sharing our life experiences—as friends. My door will always be open.

I want to give thanks and praise to all of you who have been involved in DNJ, in the past and the present: excellent columnists, authors, artists, copy-editors/proofreaders, poets, reviewers, publishers, readers … all of you. You have given of yourselves in countless and generous ways, willing to share your hard-earned wisdom, skills and souls in the most intimate and personal of ways. And during very turbulent times. You have made a difference in the world! I also want to thank those of you who became a part of the Dream Circle; your contributions and involvement have made it possible for DNJ to remain in print over the past several years. May countless blessings visit you always, my kind-hearted friends.

_~Roberta Ossana_
